Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most common neurodevelopmental disorders of childhood.
Symptoms start in childhood and often last into adulthood.
Identifying signs and symptoms of ADHD can help lead to a diagnosis, which is a process with several steps.
CDC works with partners to collect data on ADHD, allowing us to better understand diagnosis, treatment patterns, and co-occurring conditions for children and adults with ADHD.
What it is
ADHD is one of the most common neurodevelopmental disorders
A
of childhood.
ADHD is usually first diagnosed in childhood and often lasts into adulthood. Children with ADHD may have trouble paying attention, controlling impulsive behaviors (may act without thinking about what the result will be), or be overly active.
ADHD Awareness Toolkit
Find and share ADHD resources using CDC's partner toolkit.
Keep Reading
Other Concerns and Conditions with ADHD
Types
There are
three different ways
ADHD presents itself, depending on which types of symptoms are strongest in the individual at the time of diagnosis:
Predominantly
inattentive
presentation
Predominantly
h
yperactive-impulsive
presentation
Combined
presentation (a combination of inattentive and hyperactive-impulsive symptoms)
Signs and symptoms
It is normal for children to have trouble focusing and behaving at one time or another. However, for children with ADHD the symptoms continue, can be severe, and can cause difficulty at school, at home, or with friends.
ADHD symptoms can change over time
Symptoms can change over time and might increase when the demands of daily life increase. The way ADHD symptoms present may change over time as well.
Keep Reading
Symptoms of ADHD
Risk factors
The causes of ADHD are unknown, but scientists have identified some possible risk factors
Genes play an important role in a person's risk of ADHD.
Genetics
1
Exposure to environmental risks (for example, lead) during pregnancy or at a young age
2
Alcohol and tobacco use during pregnancy
3
and other pregnancy-related factors
4
Child health conditions, including head injuries
5
Parental mental health
6
and family environment
7
See Also
CDC is working to help identify possible risk factors for ADHD
Diagnosis
If you are concerned about whether your child might have ADHD,
the first step is to talk with a healthcare provider to find out if the symptoms fit an ADHD diagnosis.
The diagnosis can be made by a mental health professional, like a psychologist or psychiatrist, or by a primary care provider, like a pediatrician.
Talk with a healthcare provider first if you think your child might have ADHD.
There is no single test to diagnose ADHD
Talk with a healthcare provider first. Deciding if someone has ADHD is a process with several steps. Many
other problems,
such as anxiety, depression, sleep problems, and certain types of learning disabilities, can have similar symptoms to ADHD.
Keep Reading
Diagnosing ADHD
Treatment and managing symptoms
In most cases, ADHD is best treated with a combination of
behavior therapy and medication.
For preschool-aged children (4-5 years of age) with ADHD, behavior therapy, particularly training for parents, is recommended as the first line of treatment before medication is tried. What works best can depend on the child and family. Effective treatment plans will include close monitoring, follow-ups, and making changes, if needed, along the way.
In most cases, ADHD is best treated with a combination of behavior therapy and medication.
Managing symptoms: Staying healthy
Being healthy is important for everyone and can be especially important for people with ADHD. In addition to behavioral therapy and medication, having a healthy lifestyle can make it easier to deal with ADHD symptoms. Here are some healthy behaviors that may help:
Developing
healthy eating habits
such as eating plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains and choosing lean protein sources
Participating in daily
physical activity
based on age
Limiting the amount of daily
screen time
from TVs, computers, phones, and other electronics
Getting the
recommended amount of sleep
each night based on age