Diagnosing ADHD is a process with several steps.
If you think your child might have ADHD, the first step is to talk with a healthcare provider.
How is ADHD diagnosed?
Deciding if a child has ADHD is a process with several steps. There is
no single test to diagnose
ADHD, and many other problems, such as sleep disorders, anxiety, depression, and certain types of learning disabilities, can also have symptoms similar to ADHD.
Talk with a doctor
If you are concerned about whether your child might have ADHD,
the first step
is to talk with a healthcare provider to find out if the symptoms fit an ADHD diagnosis. The diagnosis can be made by a mental health professional, like a psychologist or psychiatrist, or by a primary care provider, like a pediatrician.
Concerned about your child's development?
Diagnosing ADHD in children
Diagnosing ADHD involves several steps. One step of the process involves having a medical exam, including
hearing
and
vision tests,
to rule out other problems with symptoms like ADHD. Your child's healthcare provider might recommend screening tests or other next steps based on your child's
family health history.
An ADHD diagnosis can be made by a mental health professional, like a psychologist or psychiatrist, or a primary care provider, like a pediatrician. You can also contact a local
early intervention program
for a free or low-cost evaluation (children under age 3) or school system for a free evaluation (children 3 years or older). A doctor's referral is
not needed
for connecting with an early intervention program.
For children, the
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends
that healthcare providers ask parents, teachers, and other adults who care for the child about the child's behavior in different settings, including at home, school, or with peers. The healthcare provider will look to determine whether the child has another condition or conditions that might explain the symptoms better, or that can
often occur at the same time as ADHD.
Clinical care for children and adolescents with ADHD
Find out more about AAP's recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of children and adolescents with ADHD.
Read more.
Act Early!
Acting early when there's a concern can have a significant impact on a child's ability to learn new skills and overcome challenges and can increase success in school and life.
CDC's
"Learn the Signs. Act Early." program
free, family-friendly, high-quality, and research-based resources to engage families and providers in monitoring children’s developmental milestones from ages 2 months through 5 years. These resources can help families learn the signs of child development and encourage them to act early and get help for their child when they have questions or concerns.
Talk to your child's doctor first if you have concerns about their development.