Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) can often be managed with the right treatment.
Types of treatment for ADHD include behavior therapy and medications.
Treatment recommendations vary by age group.
Parent training in behavior management.
What to consider after an ADHD diagnosis
When a child is
diagnosed with ADHD,
parents often have concerns about which treatment is right for their child. ADHD can often be managed with the right treatment. There are many treatment options, and what works best can depend on the person, their family, and their environment.
To find the best options for children, it is recommended that parents work closely with others involved in their child's life—healthcare providers, teachers, coaches, and other family members.
CDC funds the National Resource Center on ADHD (NRC), a program of Children and Adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (CHADD). The NRC provides
resources, information, and advice for parents on how to help their child.
Need help?
CHADD's National Resource Center on ADHD operates a call center (
1-866-200-8098
) with trained staff to answer questions about ADHD.
Treatment types
Behavior Therapy
Behavior therapy, including training for parents; and
Medications
Stimulants
Non-stimulants
ADHD treatment and possible side effects
Some treatments for ADHD,
such as stimulant medication, may have side effects that could affect your child's health, such as difficulty sleeping and loss of appetite. Talk with your child's healthcare provider about these side effects.
CDC tracks trends in diagnosis and medication treatment among children with ADHD.
Data and Statistics on ADHD
CDC uses datasets from parent surveys and healthcare claims to understand diagnosis and treatment pa...
Treatment recommendations
By Age Group
For children with ADHD younger than 6 years of age,
the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends
parent training in behavior management
as the first line of treatment, before medication is tried.
For children 6 years of age and older,
the recommendations include medication and behavior therapy together—parent training in behavior management for children up to age 12 and other types of behavior therapy and training for adolescents. Schools can be part of the treatment as well. AAP recommendations also include adding behavioral classroom intervention and school supports.
Learn more about how the school environment can be part of treatment.
Behavior Therapy First for Young Children with ADHD
Children younger than 6 years of age
For young children with ADHD,
behavior therapy is an important first step before trying medication because:
Parent training in behavior management gives parents the skills and strategies to help their child.
Parent training in behavior management has been shown to work as well as medication for ADHD in young children.
Young children have more side effects from ADHD medications than older children.
The long-term effects of ADHD medications on young children have not been well-studied.
Important note for children under 6 years of age
Experts recommend
using medication
only after behavior therapy has been tried first
because the medication may not be as effective, and the side effects may be more severe.
School-age children and adolescents
For children ages 6 years and older,
AAP recommends combining medication treatment with behavior therapy. Several types of
behavior therapies are considered effective,
including:
Parent training in behavior management;
Behavioral interventions in the classroom;
Peer interventions that focus on behavior; and
Organizational skills training.
These approaches are often most effective if they are used together, depending on the needs of the individual child and the family. Parents, healthcare providers, and
the school
can work together on developing the right treatment plan.
Good treatment plans will include close monitoring of whether and how much the treatment helps the child's behavior, as well as making changes as needed along the way.
ADHD care and treatment recommendations
Learn more about AAP recommendations for the care and treatment of children and adolescents with ADHD.
Clinical Care of ADHD in Children
Medications used to treat ADHD
Medication can help children manage their ADHD symptoms in their everyday life and can help them control the behaviors that cause difficulties with family, friends, and at school.
Medications can affect children differently and can have side effects such as decreased appetite or sleep problems. One child may respond well to one medication, but not to another.
Several different types of medications are
FDA-approved to treat ADHD in children as young as 6 years of age:
Stimulants
are the best-known and most widely used ADHD medications. Between 70-80% of children with ADHD have fewer ADHD symptoms when taking these fast-acting medications.
Nonstimulants
were approved for the treatment of ADHD in 2003. They do not work as quickly as stimulants, but their effect can last up to 24 hours.
Keep in mind
Healthcare providers who prescribe medication may need to try different medications and doses. The
AAP recommends
that healthcare providers observe and adjust the dose of medication to find the right balance between benefits and side effects. It is important for parents to work with their child's healthcare providers to find the medication that works best for their child.
Parent training in behavior management
ADHD affects not only a child’s ability to pay attention or sit still at school, but it also affects relationships with family and other children.  Children with ADHD often show behaviors that can be very disruptive to others. Behavior therapy is a treatment option that can help reduce these behaviors and can help increase self-regulation skills. it is often helpful to start behavior therapy as soon as a diagnosis is made.
Parent Training in Behavior Management
The goals of
behavior therapy
are to learn or strengthen positive behaviors and eliminate unwanted or problem behaviors. Behavior therapy for ADHD can include
Behavior therapy with children
Behavioral interventions in the classroom
These approaches can also be used together. For children who attend
early childhood programs,
it is usually most effective if parents and educators work together to help the child.
Behavior management tips for parents:
1
2
Tips
Suggestions (examples)
Create a routine.
For tasks that happen every day, try to follow the same schedule every day, from wake-up time to bedtime.
Get organized.
Encourage your child to put schoolbags, clothing, and toys in the same place every day so that they will be less likely to lose them.
Manage distractions.
Turn off the TV and social media, limit noise, and provide a clean workspace when your child is doing homework. Some children with ADHD learn well if they are moving or listening to background music. Watch your child and see what works.
Limit choices.
To help your child not feel overwhelmed or overstimulated, offer choices with only a few options. For example, have them choose between this outfit or that one, this meal or that one, or this toy or that one.
Be clear and specific when you talk with your child.
Let your child know you are listening by describing what you heard them say. Use clear, brief directions when they need to do something.
Help your child plan.
Break down complicated tasks into simpler, shorter steps. For long tasks, starting early and taking breaks may help limit stress.
Use goals and praise or other rewards.
Use a chart to list goals and track positive behaviors, then let your child know they have done well by telling them or by rewarding their efforts in other ways. Be sure the goals are realistic—small steps are important.
Discipline effectively.
Instead of scolding, yelling, or spanking, use
effective directions,
time-outs
, or removal of privileges as
consequences
for inappropriate behavior.
Create positive opportunities.
Children with ADHD may find certain situations stressful. Finding out and encouraging what your child does well—whether it's school, sports, art, music, or play—can help create positive experiences.
Provide a healthy lifestyle.
Nutritious food, lots of physical activity
, and
sufficient sleep
are important; they can help keep ADHD symptoms from getting worse.
Resources
ADHD in Children
Treating ADHD
Understanding ADHD: Information for Parents
National Institute of Mental Health