CDC uses datasets from parent surveys and healthcare claims to understand diagnosis and treatment patterns for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Estimates for diagnosis and treatment can vary depending on the source.
This page includes ADHD data from different sources.
ADHD diagnosis
Millions of U.S. children have been diagnosed with ADHD.
1
An estimated 7 million (11.4%) U.S. children aged 3–17 years have ever been diagnosed with ADHD, according to a national survey of parents using data from 2022.
Did you know?
In 2022, an additional 1 million U.S. children aged 3-17 years had ever received an ADHD diagnosis compared to 2016.
1
2
ADHD estimates by sex, race, and ethnicity:
1
Boys (15%) were more likely to be diagnosed with ADHD than girls (8%).
Black children and White children were more often diagnosed with ADHD (both 12%) than Asian children (4%). American Indian/Alaska Native children (10%) were also more often diagnosed with ADHD than Asian children.
Approximately 6% of Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander children were diagnosed with ADHD.
Overall, non-Hispanic children (12%) were diagnosed with ADHD more often than Hispanic children (10%).
ADHD symptoms can vary in severity.
About 6 in 10 children had moderate or severe ADHD.
Children with both ADHD and
another co-occurring condition,
such as behavioral or conduct problems, learning disorders, anxiety, or depression, more often had severe ADHD than children with ADHD without other co-occurring conditions.
See Also:
Identifying Risk Factors for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD): a Public Health Concern and Opportunity
See Also:
ADHD Prevalence Among U.S. Children and Adolescents in 2022: Diagnosis, Severity, Co-Occurring Disorders, and Treatment
Estimates for ADHD diagnosis and treatment vary by state.
3
National estimates among U.S. children aged 3–17 years
who have ever been diagnosed with ADHD
vary from 6% to 16% across states.
Estimates for receiving any
ADHD treatment
among children with current ADHD vary from 58% to 92% across states. ADHD treatments include:
ADHD Treatment Types
State Estimates
ADHD Medication
Vary from 38% to 81%
ADHD Behavior Therapy
Vary from 39% to 62%
See Also:
State-Level Estimates of the Prevalence of Parent-Reported ADHD Diagnosis and Treatment Among U.S. Children and Adolescents, 2016 to 2019
Other concerns and conditions with ADHD
Many children with ADHD also have other co-occurring conditions.
1
According to a national 2022 parent survey, nearly 78% of children with ADHD had at least one other co-occurring condition:
Almost half of the children with ADHD had a
behavior or conduct problem.
About 4 in 10 of the children with ADHD had
anxiety.
Other conditions affecting children with ADHD include
depression
,
autism spectrum disorder
, and
Tourette syndrome.
Co-occurring Conditions with ADHD – Interactive Data Charts
1
Keep Reading:
Other Concerns and Conditions with ADHD
Treatment of ADHD
Did you know?
Treatment for ADHD can include behavior therapy and medication. Recommendations for the use of ADHD medication and behavior therapy are age specific. For children younger than 6 years of age, behavior therapy is recommended as the first line of treatment. For children 6 years of age and older, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends behavior therapy and medication, preferably together.
Read more about ADHD treatment recommendations.
Nearly 2 million U.S. children with ADHD did not receive ADHD-specific treatment in 2022.
1
A national parent survey from 2022 reported on medication and
behavior treatment
for children 3–17 years of age with current ADHD:
About 30% of children with ADHD
did not receive medication treatment or behavior treatment
, compared with 23% of children 2–17 years of age with ADHD in 2016.
1
3
About 32% children with ADHD
received both medication treatment and behavior treatment.
Overall, the total number of children receiving behavior treatment increased from 2016 (2.5 million) to 2022 (2.8 million).