In hIs new book, Dr. Thomas e. brown challenges many
of the “widely prevalent myths, mistaken assumptions about ADHD,
that are still held by many lay people and some professionals.” He lists
thirty-five of those myths in his first chapter and then briefly summa-
rizes the science-based facts that contradict them. He devotes the rest of
the book to more substantial evidence of what we have learned about
ADHD, thus describing a new understanding of the disorder. Here, At-
tention excerpts ten of the myths and Dr. Brown’s summaries of what
the evidence says.
n
Te
s
h
yt
M
about
ADHD
koctsrettuhs
,kcotskniht
6 Attention
A person who has ADHD always has difficulty with executive consider important—if only they will exercise a presumed internal
functions such as focusing on a task and keeping things in mind, force called “willpower.” This new model of ADHD challenges that as-
regardless of what they are doing. sumption on the grounds that most operations of executive functions
Clinical data indicate that executive function impairments charac- are unconscious, not in the psychoanalytic sense of repression, but in
teristic of ADHD are situationally-variable; each person with ADHD the more modern sense of “automaticity.”
tends to have some specific activities or situations in which they have From this view, most operations of these executive functions are not
no difficulty in utilizing those executive functions that, for them, are under conscious control any more than is erectile dysfunction. Research
significantly impaired in most other situations. Typically these are ac- on motivational influences impacting decisions of “Will you do it and,
tivities in which they have strong personal interest or where they be- if so, how and when?” has shown that such decisions result primarily
lieve that something very unpleasant will follow quickly if they do not from complex and dynamic interactions of memory-influenced emo-
take care of this task right here, right now. Research findings indicate tions with inborn patterns of reactivity that operate instantaneously
that intra-individual variability in performance from one context or with relatively insignificant conscious input, despite our assumptions
time to another is the essence of ADHD. Multiple studies have shown to the contrary.
that performance of persons with ADHD is highly sensitive to con-
textual factors, e.g. reward, nature of the task, and internal cognitive Persons with high IQ are not likely to have executive function
and physiological factors. impairments of ADHD because they are smart enough to
overcome such difficulties.
If a person with ADHD really wants to focus Intelligence measured by IQ tests has virtually no systematic relation-
and work effectively on a task they ship to the syndrome of executive function impairments described
can make themselves do it. Using in the new model of ADHD. Studies have shown that even extremely
executive functions is just a matter of high IQ children and adults can suffer impairments of ADHD which
“willpower.” significantly impair their ability to deploy their strong cognitive skills
Because persons with ADHD can typ- consistently and effectively in many situations of daily life. Clinical
ically exercise their executive functions observations indicate that often high IQ individuals with ADHD face
very well on specific activities or tasks lengthy delays before they obtain a correct diagnosis and appropriate
that interest them or which cause them treatment. This is due largely to uninformed teachers, parents, clini-
to fear some very unpleasant outcome cians, and patients themselves assuming that high IQ precludes ADHD.
quite soon if they do not accomplish
that task, it is easy to assume that indi- Executive function impairments of ADHD usually are outgrown
viduals with ADHD can exercise those when the person reaches their late teens or early twenties.
same functions equally well in Some children with ADHD gradually outgrow their ADHD-related
other situations which they impairments as they get into middle childhood or adolescence. For
or others them ADHD is a variety of developmental lag. Most often hyperac-
tive and/or impulsive symptoms improve as the individual reaches
adolescence while the broad range of inattention symptoms persist
about
and sometimes get worse. Often the most problematic period is dur-
and Why ing junior high, high school and the first few years of university; that
is the time when the individual faces the widest range of challenging
activities without opportunity to escape from the ones in which they
have little interest or ability. After that period some with ADHD are
They Are fortunate enough to get employment and a life situation where they
can build on their strengths and find ways to work around their cogni-
ADHD tive weaknesses; others are not similarly fortunate.
Wrong Modern research methods have established that executive
function impairments are localized mainly in the prefrontal cortex.
Executive functions are complex and involve not only the prefrontal
cortex, but also many other components of the brain. Those with
ADHD have been shown to differ in the rate of maturation of spe-
cific areas of the cortex, in the thickness of cortical tissue, in charac-
teristics of the parietal and cerebellar regions, as well as in the basal
Copyright © 2013 from A New Understanding of ADHD
in Children and Adults: Executive Function Impairments by
Thomas E. Brown, PhD. Reproduced by permission of Tay-
lor and Francis Group, LLC, a division of Informa plc.
koctsrettuhs
,kcotskniht
by thomas e. Brown, PhD
June 2013 7
ganglia, and in the white matter tracts that connect and expansion of the old model. Most individuals who meet
provide critically important communication between vari- diagnostic criteria for the new model will also meet the di-
ous regions of the brain. Recent research has also shown agnostic criteria for the older model. The old model is no
that those with ADHD tend to have different patterns in longer tenable not because it identifies individuals with a
functional connectivity, patterns of oscillations that allow totally different disorder; the old model is no longer tenable
different regions of the brain to exchange information. because it does not adequately capture the wide breadth,
complexity and persistence of this syndrome as it is found
Emotions and motivation are not involved in executive across the lifespan.
functions associated with ADHD.
Although earlier research and diagnostic criteria for ADHD ADHD-related executive function impairments are due
gave little attention to the role of emotion and motivation primarily to a “chemical imbalance” in the brain.
in this disorder, more recent research has highlighted their The term “chemical imbalance in the brain” is often used
critical importance. Some research has focused solely on to explain impairments of ADHD. This suggests that there
the problems of many with ADHD in regulating expres- are chemicals floating around in the cerebral spinal fluid
sion of their emotions without sufficient inhibition or that surrounds the brain that are simply not in correct pro-
modulation. However, research has also demonstrated that portions, as though there were too much salt in the soup.
a chronic deficit in emotions that comprise motivation is a This assumption is simply wrong. Impairments of ADHD
critically important aspect of impairments for most indi- are not due to a global excess or lack of a specific chemical
viduals with ADHD. Studies have shown that this is related within or around the brain. The primary problem is related
to measurable differences in the operation of the reward to chemicals manufactured, released, and then reloaded at
system within the brains of those with ADHD. Those with the level of synapses, the trillions of infinitesimal junctions
ADHD tend to have abnormalities in the anticipatory dopa- between certain networks of neurons that manage critical
mine cell firing in the reward system; this makes it difficult activities within the brain’s management system. The brain
for them to arouse and sustain motivation for activi- is essentially a huge electrical system that has multiple
ties that do not provide immediate and continuing subsystems that need to communicate with one
reinforcement. another constantly to get anything done.
This system operates on low voltage elec-
The new model of ADHD as developmentally trical impulses that carry messages from
impaired executive function is completely one tiny neuron to another in fractions of
different from the older model of ADHD. a second. However, these neurons are not
The new model of ADHD differs in many ways physically connected; there are gaps at each
from the earlier model of this disorder as es- point of connection. To get messages from
sentially a cluster of behavior problems in young one neuron to another, an electrical mes-
children. The new model is truly a shift of para- sage needs to jump the gap. Arrival of
digm for understanding this syndrome. the electrical impulse causes tiny
It applies not only to children, but “micro-dots” of a neurotrans-
also to adolescents and mitter chemical to
adults. It focuses on be released. This
while many individuals find
a wide range of self- works like a spark
management functions their aDhD impairments plug to carry the
that are not limited to message across
becoming less problematic
readily observable be- the gap and
haviors; functions as they get older, due to further down
included are the circuit.
maturation of the brain
linked to com- Persons
plex operations or changing environmental w i t h
of the brain. ADHD
demands, there are many
However, there tend not
are still substan- for whom significant to release
tial and important impairment persists well enough of
points of overlap these essential
into their adult years.
between the old chemicals, or
and new models. to release and
The new model is reload them
an extension and too quickly, be-
koctsrettuhs
8 Attention
fore an adequate connection has been made. Medications mean that all children on such medications display these
used to treat ADHD help to improve this process. results, but group data demonstrate statistically significant
improvements. However, it should be noted that these results
For some individuals with ADHD, prescribed are found only during the time the medication is actually
medications can cure their ADHD impairments so they active in the person’s body.
do not need to keep taking the medication.
Medications for ADHD cure nothing. They are not like anti- ADHD impairments sometimes last into early
biotics that may cure an infection if the medication is taken adulthood, but then they usually diminish before middle
consistently for a few days or weeks. ADHD medications are age.
more like eyeglasses that may improve or even normalize a Impairments of ADHD are determined not solely by the
person’s vision while the glasses are worn, but the eyeglasses individual’s symptoms, but by discrepancies between the
cannot fix the problem with the person’s eyes. When the eye- demands of daily life facing the individual and their capac-
glasses are taken off, the person’s vision returns to whatever it ity to meet them. A business or professional person with
was previously. Most medications for ADHD currently avail- ADHD might function very well in their daily life if they are
able last for somewhere between 2 and 12 hours, then they fortunate enough to have a job that fits their talents, and co-
gradually stop being helpful. Some persons who take medi- workers, a secretary or others, who are able and willing to
cations for ADHD find that there is a point where they no take care of functions that are difficult for the person with
longer need to take that medication; they are able to function ADHD. Yet, if that adult is transferred to a different job where
reasonably well without it. Sometimes this is due to increased there are increased demands and insufficient support, their
development of their brain as they get older; the processes of ADHD impairments may become much more conspicuous
natural maturation that were a bit slower in them than for and problematic. Likewise, if an adult with ADHD is living
their contemporaries eventually kick in. In other cases such with a partner who is able and willing to carry much of the
an improvement may be due to some change in the situa- responsibility of planning and preparing meals, managing
tion, a new teacher who is more supportive, a new job that is finances, and attending to household routines, that person
not as demanding of executive functions as the previous job, with ADHD may live comfortably and contribute to the
or added sources of support. Such improvements without household in other ways. However, if the help and support
medication may be temporary or quite long-lasting. of that other person is lost due to illness, separation, divorce
or death, the person with ADHD may suddenly be faced with
There is no evidence that medications for ADHD multiple problems that are very difficult to cope with.
actually improve executive function impairments or that While many individuals find their ADHD impairments
any improvements last. becoming less problematic as they get older, due to matura-
There are three different types of evidence that demonstrate tion of the brain or changing environmental demands, there
the effectiveness of specific medications for ADHD improv- are many for whom significant impairment persists well into
ing impaired executive functions. First, imaging studies have their adult years. Research has shown that many individuals
shown that stimulants improve, and may normalize, the with ADHD find their functional impairments persist well
ability of individuals with ADHD to get activated for as- into middle age and often beyond. In addition, bodily chang-
signed tasks, to minimize distractibility while doing tasks, to es may cause late onset of ADHDlike impairments, e.g. for
improve functional connections between various regions of women during and after menopause, and for both men and
brain involved in executive functions, to improve working women as their bodies age. Extension of ADHD impairments
memory performance, to reduce boredom during task per- into middle and later years of life has not yet been adequately
formance, and, in some cases, to normalize some structural studied. ●A
abnormalities in specific brain regions of those with ADHD.
Second, experiments comparing performance of children
Thomas E. Brown, PhD, is Associate Director of the Yale Clinic
with ADHD with matched controls or when on placebo in
for Attention and Related Disorders and Assistant Clinical
comparison to prescribed medication have shown that when
Professor of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine.
on appropriate medication, children with ADHD tend to
He is a Fellow of the American Psychological Association,
minimize inappropriate classroom behavior and control
developer of the Brown ADD Scales for Children and Adults
their behavior more like typical children in their class. Ex-
(Pearson), and author of the prize-winning book, Attention
periments have also shown that medication can help those
Deficit Disorder: the unfocused Mind in children and
with ADHD to improve their speed and accuracy in solv-
Adults (Yale University Press, 2005). Dr. Brown is also
ing arithmetic problems; they increase their willingness to
editor of the textbook, ADhD comorbidities: handbook of
persist in trying to solve frustrating problems; they improve
ADhD complications in children and Adults (American
their working memory, and increase their motivation to per-
Pyschiatric Publishing, 2009). Visit his website at www.
form and execute more adequately a wide variety of tasks
DrThomasEBrown.com.
associated with executive functions. These results do not
koctsrettuhs
CHADD does not endorse products, services, publications, medications or treatments, including those advertised in this magazine. June 2013 9